Pulitzer Prizewinning author and
oncologist Dr. Siddhart Mukhoji has
probably done more than anyone else in
the world to demystify science and
medicine for people like you and me. His
latest book, The Song of the Cell, is an
ode to what he calls the basic unit of
life. But then the book goes on to ask
the tantalizing and intriguing question
what is life? Joining us now is Dr.
Mukherji himself. It's good to see you
Sadhart in person rather than the other
end of a crackly internet line.
It's a fascinating book. Um the third
after the emperor of malades and the you
know your book on the gene.
Tell me before we talk about the book
what do you remember about the first
cell that you ever cultured?
Well, it was um it was at Oxford uh
which um where I was a graduate student.
You know, I had worked before I was a I
had worked before at when I was in
college uh on genes and genetics but not
really on cell biology. Um and so I was
at Oxford when I really cultured my own
first my my first cells. I learned um so
I had plated the cells at night and in
the in the morning um I took a look down
the microscope and um it was a T- cell
and I was learning to culture tea cells
and um and amazingly there it was sort
of um I call it sort of lum you know um
bark the one thing is that when you
learn to look at cells you sort of
become like a gardener uh you know just
the way you look at plants um you learn
basically by looking at a cell and I try
to teach my students this my graduate
students this by looking at a cell you
can tell about tell a lot about the life
of the cell whether it's happy whether
it's unhappy just like you can like
gardeners look at plants um and there it
was I mean you know and what's amazing
about it is that while I was looking at
it it started moving and you all of a
sudden realize that you've you've
basically cultivated cultured or you're
you know you're holding life in your
hands
but the analogy with gardening is very
intriguing because people sink to their
plants and they believe that the plants
will blossom if you sing to them.
Right.
One of the things your book says is that
we do not yet know how to sing to
ourselves. We do not understand their
song.
Yeah. I mean, you know, the the the
title actually, this is an interesting
book usually. Um, well, I title the I
title my books very late in the book.
Um, and the title sort of comes to me in
a kind of dreamy way. Um, and I this
book had a different title. Um, and it
wasn't working for a long time and I was
struggling with the title and then it
just came to me in a flash and I was
like, of course, that's the title. So
the title the song of the cell refers to
two ideas and two very important ideas.
Um the first idea is that um the we've
we've talked a lot in the public
discourse uh about genes.
Um and genes are units of information.
They're carried in DNA, the molecule.
But what's interesting is and what often
people don't realize is that genes
themselves are lifeless. They are units
of life. They are they carry the
information to build life, but they're
lifeless. It's the cell that that's that
sings it out. Um just like a musician
sings out a score. A score is lifeless.
Um you need a symphony or a musician or
a group of musicians to play that score
and therefore enliven it. In the same
way, you need a cell to bring genes to
life. It's otherwise lifeless. So hence
the song. Um but there's another song.
So that song we are learning. We're
learning to read. We're learning to
understand. But there's another song
which is sort of we encounter much later
in the book and that's the song or the
intercommunication between cells. How
for instance one cell in the immune
system speaks to another cell in the
immune system and thereby creates a what
I call a coordinated sense of life. I
mean it's not random. Um your the you
know the cells in your the neurons in
your brain speak to other neurons in
your brain. That's not random.
That song which is the song that goes
between cells is something that still
remains somewhat mysterious and was made
the fact that it was a mystery was it
made even more clear during the covid
pandemic. Yeah, we'll come to co but you
know um I think not many people who are
outside of medicine uh and science
understand what you explain in this book
that whether it is IVF, whether it is
cancer, whether it is depression,
whether it is multiple sclerosis,
whether it is HIV, it all comes down to
the cell. uh both the sort of rebellion
of the cell as well as medicine's
attempt then uh to treat the cell and
therefore treat the infection. Talk a
little bit about that.
Well, it's it's you know um this is an
idea that was really a revolutionary
idea um initially by Rudolph Verkau and
then subsequently by many other people.
But the idea
it's so simple that it's almost missed
which is that you know we think of many
things as caused by the environment or
the initiated by the environment or
psychosocial things depression being one
of them but ultimately for it to have an
effect in the human body it has to go
through a cellular um through cells. um
even diseases that we think are you know
psychosocial situational grief,
depression uh all the way to you know
cancer as you said multiple scerosis
ultimately is it has to do with
dysfunction of cells. So, so the central
message in some ways in this book and of
course the central message in um the
world of biology is that everything that
we do,
every activity, every um life activity
that we do is based on cells
and every disease is a dysfunction of
cells. So if you want to do medicine, if
you want to learn medicine, if you want
to understand the basis of any disease
and I I really mean any disease, you
have to understand its cell biological
basis, what's gone wrong with the cell
and how we can fix it. That's the basis
of all medicine.
You mentioned depression. So let's talk
about that. It's something um you've
said is personal for you. I have spoken
to you before about your father. Y
uh your father who fought dementia in
the later years of his life then falls
eventually dies from the fall. You had a
very very moving piece
in the New Yorker. I think we pulled it
out as well for our viewers and there's
a beautiful photograph of you with him
and he dies and then you who has
actually been traumatized because you
know of your father's dementia that
maybe this is something that will pass
down in the family and you speak about
you know sort of almost breezily about
the madness in the Mukji family quote
unquote. Uh you also battled depression.
Uh-huh.
That experience your father and yourself
when you join the dots back to what you
now understand about the cell as a unit
of life. How do you join those dots?
Well, so um you know one people think
about depression in many different ways.
It's a little bit it's kaleidoscopic. Um
but to be um you know you could have it
as a consequence of grieving and the
grieving doesn't go away. You could have
it as a consequence of trauma. You could
have it as a consequence of so many
different um as I said um psychosocial
inputs. But ultimately if you look where
it all impinges um it has to impinge on
some nerve circuit somewhere in your
brain
and that nerve circuit is not
functioning appropriately in uh it that
nerve circuit
presumably regulates mood so that your
mood can swing up and swing down. You
experience happiness when the situation
is happy in someone who's depressed
those uh riostats those the capacity of
your mood to swing appropriately gets uh
offset so that even under situations
which would normally make you enjoy
pleasure enjoy happiness enjoy u enjoy
life um doesn't doesn't function. So
even depression ultimately turns out to
be of course a cellular disease. Um and
the first attempts to treat treat
depression um were attempts to um as you
know change um the chemicals that are
responsible for uh nerves speaking to
each other. So drugs like Prozac and
Paxel and Zoloft and other drugs are
drugs that attempt to change the
neurotransmitters but they don't work
very well. Um, part of the reason this
is a hypothesis that they don't work
very well is that they really because we
don't understand depression at a
cellular level.
What's the nerve circuit that's gone?
What's the mood regulating circuit
that's gone wrong? Um, how can we change
that mood regulating circuit? And more
and more the belief that it's not just
um just a simple circuit. It's not like
sparking a wire or soldering a wire
together, but in fact it's how those
wires are connected together with each
other. um and what the connections are,
how deep the connections are, etc. that
may be responsible for someone's again
for the inability of the mood regulating
circuits in the neuron. Um I think
that's helpful for many reasons. One of
them is that it takes the stigma of um
of depression and converts it from a uh
necessarily a psychosocial, grief
related, trauma related disease, which
it certainly is, and looks for it uh
looks for a biological locus of it. And
and you know, typically when you start
looking for biological lossi of
diseases, you suddenly realize that it's
your body that's malfunctioning. It's
not something you're doing that's wrong.
um which is typically the the you know
the language and the rhetoric around
mental illness particular
somehow associated with weakness.
Yeah. With weakness is you know you're
doing something you know snap out of it
you know slap yourself out of it.
Yeah.
And you can't slap your neurons. Um and
you can't slap your neurons out of it.
How did you deal with your own
depression? Were you able to apply this
prism of science looking in when you
turn the lens on yourself? Um I mean you
know in many ways yes and in many ways
no. I mean you know when you experience
something in yourself you can't often
turn the prism of science to yourself
but uh but it was to be honest it was
helpful to know and to understand that
there was an organic I mean in biology
we use the word organic to describe an
illness that originates in cell biology
or in biology. Um it was and as opposed
to something hallucinatory or ghostly or
something that lies outside yourself to
somatize it to make it into something
that's part of your body and to think
about it as part of your body made for
me it was very helpful because I thought
to myself okay well you know some people
have broken limbs some people you know
break their bones um in my case some
circuit in my brain is broken um and um
my job is to fix it. Now how does one
fix it? Obviously, it's a combination of
medicines, um, various forms of
psychosocial help, um, therapy, etc.,
etc. But, but, but, but, but, but, but,
but, but, but, but, but even the simple
assumption that it's not my fault, that
I can't slap my neurons out of it, as it
were, um, was really helpful.
You you describe the cell um, as the
basic unit of life, and then you say,
but what is life? And
one of the conclusions you reach is that
it's like a menu. It isn't any one
thing. It's many things simultaneously.
What are some of these many things?
Well, so the definition of life has been
very challenging ironically for uh for
scientists. I mean, you would think that
you would be very easy. Um but it turns
out it not. It's not very easy. And in
fact, um uh life is defined along as
possessing some qualities. I'll give you
some of the qualities. I can't give you
all of them. Um so one very important
quality is um metabolism. So the
capacity to turn nutrients into energy
which is the fundamental piece of u is
is a feature of life um uh reproduction.
So if you can't if if a cell can't
reproduce or if a organism can't
reproduce there won't be any more
organisms. So that's one of the
definitions of life.
Um a third one's a a peculiar long word.
I've written a lot about it homeostasis.
um which is the capacity of a system
whatever it might be to restore balance
um very old idea in science even
Aristotle spoke about it um there's vic
writings about it um or they don't use
the word homeostasis but it means the
restoration of a restoration to a normal
your body when it's put into just to
give you one example if I if I throw you
into the Antarctic um your body will
have all these systems that will get
activated to regulate your heat uh
internal heat so that it comes back to
as close back to normal as possible.
That's an example of homeostasis. So
these are some examples. Metabolism,
reproduction, homeostasis are some
examples. I'll give you things that
something that life is not. So for
instance, sensience
or consciousness
or even the idea of agency are not
requirements for life. Sensience is not
a requirement for you don't even have to
be a sensient human being. uh yeast for
instance yeast cells yeah or many cells
in your body are not sensitive they are
not they have sensors but they don't
have consciousness they don't have so
those are not requirements for life u
but the other ones are
now if I were to say this in a kind of
rudimentary lay person's language my
understanding of this is what keeps us
alive uh also damages us sometimes
simultaneously hence cancer hence
several autoimmune diseases
your book starts with a friend who is
fighting a fat turns out to be a fatal
illness. Uh you think he's getting
better eventually he's called Sam in the
book eventually he dies. Now talk about
your research where you are using TE-C
cell therapy in clinical trials in
India. Uh I don't know how many people
know about this but many more people
need to know about it. joining hands
with Kieran Shaw and actually using this
therapy in clinical trials to treat
people with cancer. How is this working?
What is the sort of science behind it?
Well, the science behind it is uh is
quite astonishing. Um and we've actually
developed this science further. We have
a full unit in in Bangalore which is uh
working on this and um we'll uh do a a a
very broad press release uh next week.
Uh we've already presented the data at
um one of the most important seminars of
in cancer called the American Society of
Hematology meeting. Uh we presented six
five or six uh papers there. Uh probably
a record number for any company in
India. Um the um the basis of the
therapy is that te- cells are extracted
from the body. Um they are genetically
engineered in a very sort of almost a a
sanctuary very very hyperhygenic
sanctuary. One single bacterium one
single contaminate can destroy the
entire culture. So te- cells are
extracted from a cancer patient's body
genetically engineered and then
redirected their capacity to to kill
cells which is their natural capacity is
redirected to kill cancer cells um and
they're reinfused back into the body um
and um with phenomenal success for
certain cancers leukemas lymphas mostly
blood cancers um we my lab is now very
actively trying to extend this into um
cancers that were previously
untreatable. Um and um I mean as I said
we'll release the full set of data uh
fourth four forthcomingly um but we've
been extraordinarily uh extraordinarily
pleased with what we've done. I ask you
this because we're emerging from the
shadows of well three years of co
Yeah.
And your book talks uses a very
interesting sort of cultural reference
where you speak about the virus as
vamina and um the and humanity or the
you know human body as Mahabali this uh
this sort of illustrative example speak
about it. Well, you know, my books are
um interest I mean funny in the sense
that I throw in mythology. Um sometimes
I borrow from uh Greeks, sometimes I
borrow from in you know stories uh all
sorts of things that are going in but
but this particular thing of course I
mean I don't want to cast the virus. I
mean this is just a kind of a more of a
story. Yes, there's a there's a there's
a there's a fair degree of poetic
license, but the important thing about
all of this is in the in the famous
story um you know the um the uh that the
tiny man um is asks for uh enough land.
Bali is a you know obviously magnanimous
demon king. Yeah.
Um and the tiny man approaches him and
asks for enough land that he can cover
in three strides. And uh Mahabali sort
of laughs it off and says of course you
can have three strides of land. And the
then the first stride of land is across
the earth. The second stride of land uh
second stride is across the heavens. And
the third there's no more land to give.
And so he pushes his head on uh
Mahabali's foot on Mahabali's head um
and vanquishes him. But the idea was
that you know we were so puffed up and
by we I mean the community of scientists
um rensearchers who are so puffed up
about our capacity to understand viology
and immunology that we thought we had
understood everything and then all of a
sudden this tiny little virus that you
can't even see microscopic crosses you
know with one foot crosses across five
continents six continents and um and in
you know in three strides all of a
sudden um really brings us to our feet.
It humbles us, hobbles us. Um mature
health care systems, the United States,
the United Kingdom um and of course you
know populous states India, China etc.
are totally hobbled, humbled by this
virus but also the scientific community
is hobbled and humbled um because um all
of a sudden we are discovering things
about immunology about the immune system
that we had never discovered. We never
knew before. Um and so again with a
little bit of poetic license I sort of
really feel as if there was a kind of
moment a kind of come to come to
reckoning moment um not only for the
public health community not only for the
for for the political world but also for
the scientific world and hence the hence
that analogy.
I mean I think the wonderful things
about your book is that they embrace
both the magic and the mystery of
science. The mystery is of of course
what science may address in the future
but hasn't yet. And I think I was
reading one of your conversations where
you said that we should be able to say
we don't know. We don't know. We don't
know. So what do we still not know about
CO?
Well, there are many things that we
don't know. I mean, it's constantly
evolving. First of all, right now we
right now at this very minute, we don't
know what's happening in China. Um and
we really need to know because um
because what's happening there yesterday
was going to happen here tomorrow. um
whatever it might be, whether it's a
whether it's a benign strain of or a
relatively benign strain. There's no
benign strain, but whether it's a
relatively less pathogenic strain or
whether it's a more pathogenic strain is
something we need to know because it's
going to come in some direction or the
other. Um but on a basic science level
um what co revealed is that uh you know
we had we have this um we had a very
methodological or methodic understanding
of how immunity works against a virus.
So we thought that you know when a virus
infects a body you you know the body
mounts an im immune response that immune
response is methodical. it under goes a
certain series of uh or a certain
passage of uh maturity until you mount a
mature immune response and you clear the
virus. Co really defied that. Um uh this
phrase was coined during COVID which has
been in the scientific community called
imunological misfiring. It turns out
that the SARS cove 2 virus has a perhaps
a unique or perhaps a not a unique
capacity. We don't know but a capacity
to contort or distort the immune system
such that the method the methodical way
in which we thought that viruses are
attacked by the immune system was
totally disrupted. Um and in fact all of
a sudden we are realizing that there are
things about the way viruses interact
with the immune system that we may have
ignored. So for instance, lots of people
are talking about long co but maybe
there are long syndromes for a lot of
other viruses. We don't know because we
haven't looked long co forced us to
look. Um that's one example. So for
instance there are people who've been
for decades saying that um you know that
many of these many autoimmune diseases
or uh the many diseases that have been
lumped broadly into chronic fatigue are
actually long viral syndromes. May not
be true. may be true, but now it's a
testable hypothesis. Um, and so we're
all of a sudden revisiting a lot of
these sort of old ideas which we thrown
out um and revisiting them and thinking,
well, maybe there's a virus behind it.
Maybe there's a virus behind um, you
know, some autoimmune problem um, which
we hadn't noticed before because we
hadn't been looking properly.
Fascinating. But let's go from what we
don't know to some of the things we do
know. IVF in vitro fertilization. I
think you call it uh one of the most
profound sort of cell therapies that has
in turn led to I may not be quoting you
verbatim but a kind of human
manipulation. What do you mean by that?
Well, so IVF IVF um in vitro
fertilization of course has enabled um
some very important things in human
history. Uh obviously there are some
people not everyone but some people have
an aching desire to have a child they
cannot um other people do may not have
the desire um but some people do IVF
solves that desire that kind of
suffering for those people who want um
to have a biological child. Important to
say that um you know there are greater
social goods that other people might
want like adopting a child or not having
a child. Um but for some people it is an
important form of suffering. The im the
the the
sidebar to all of this is that IVF also
externalizes the early embryo. By
externalizes I mean it's in a petri
dish.
And once it's in a petri dish, you can
do things in a petri dish that you can't
do inside the human body, including
things like gender selection, including
things like maybe genetically changing
um something in the in the embryo. Um
and so all of a sudden you've entered a
territory which is ethically complicated
um biologically complicated etc. So um
IVF you know might start off by by being
a reproductive method but it really
becomes very quickly u things that are
maybe highly undesirable and highly
ethically and morally complicated. And I
point this out in the book. You often
have technologies like this where you
you begin with with some piece of
technology and all of a sudden you're in
in a place where is completely different
from what the origins of that technology
were. In your in your conversation with
Amitav Kosh at in Kolkata, you you
actually um express some anxiety that in
the future uh this sort of engineering
and it probably will get more and more
enabled and stronger could also be used
to curb civil liberties. You know what
the fingerprint is today,
right?
You know what what could that look like?
Let's talk a little bit about the new
human. Your book also talks about what
the new human might look like, what the
new debates, the ethical debates, the
debates around human rights might look
like.
Yeah. So, I mean, you know, there there
there have been um there have um I mean,
this is less to do with cells and more
to do with with with
genetic
with with genes in general. But of
course, these are related. I told you
how exactly they're related. But um but
uh one you know Amitab and I were
talking about the possibility of genetic
fingerprinting. So we were sitting in
Alipur jail which of course is one of
the places where human fingerprinting
was in invented um uh as a method of
identification of people and now we've
gone on from human fingerprinting to
much more complicated things like
genetic fingerprinting. So um we think
of genetic fingerprinting in the context
of forensic and crim forensics and
criminology. And certainly in the United
States and elsewhere, it's allowed us
to, for instance, uh, you know,
determine criminals um, uh, using, for
instance, blood left on the scene,
allowed us to find, um, really, uh,
perpetrators of horrible crimes,
including rape and and etc. Um, in some
ways, of course, uh, enabling, uh,
forensics and criminology. Um, there is,
of course, a dark side to all of this.
Um and that is that um we've seen uh the
possibility of every technology being
perverted by surveillance states. Um and
so you can imagine that you know you use
the same technology for tracking
migrants, tracking dissident, tracking
people that you know should be protected
uh but instead it become vulnerable
because you know they leave a a
fingerprint. So I guess my point with
Amitab which we both share is that
obviously technology has has has two
sides and um this is one example of the
the two-sided nature of of of this
technology in particular.
Let's come back to the book. The idea of
a cellular civilization, cellular
citizenship, what does it mean?
Well, um you know, in the in when you
get uh what I call megaellular organisms
like human beings, um you often have to
have systems of cells that can't live
selfishly. Cancer is an example of a
selfish cell. Its own so its sort of
sole purpose is to make more copies of
itself and take over the take over the
body. Um but
is that a kind of narcissism? Well, it's
I mean I again cancer cells don't have
agency but it's a kind of cellular
narcissism if one was to was to again
use some
poetic license but u but uh but more
importantly I think um the idea of a
cellular civilization is that cells in
order for them to function in the body
take the example of your heart um there
are you know hundreds of millions of
cells in your heart and yet if the
hundreds of millions of cells were to
were to pump discordantly uh you
wouldn't have blood circulation, they
would just be a wobbling balloon. Um,
but they do not do that. They function
coordinately. Um, and there are very
specific reasons, biological reasons,
biochemical reasons by which they
function in a coordinated manner. And
only that coordinated function allows
them to, you know, create a pump. Um,
similarly, the brains in your cell, uh,
the cells in your brain, sorry, um,
could be, you know, if they were
discordant with each other, you wouldn't
have a single thought. No thought would
spark through your brain. So the idea of
a cellular civilization is is the idea
that that these large mega collections
of cells um have to function
coordinately with each other sing to
each other as it were to go back to the
title of the book in order for your
human body to function and that's a
consequence of of you know millennial
evolution.
Yeah. But you know the book talks about
in the space that what we don't know the
liver and the spleen for example you
have this example where you do not know
why the liver is susceptible uh to a
certain kind of cell behavior that the
spleen is not and therefore you know
it's a bewildering
um sort of space which you can't in a
way apply what we know so far to do we
know why this happens
we don't and in fact that's a very
important question I mean this question
was asked in the you late 19th century
by the surgeon um Padet uh the English
surgeon who basically said you know why
is the liver a frequent sight site of
cancer metastasis whereas the spleen
which is just next to it um is not a
frequent site of cancer metastasis why
um to understand that you can't look at
the genome gene sequencing won't help
you cell biology will and so you have to
return back to very fundamental
questions about cells in order to
understand solve that question and
solving that question is important
because we need to understand how cancer
metastasizes where it metastasizes to
because of course metastasis is what
kills you in the end.
Yeah. Finally at the end uh you know
there are certain exciting developments
like the T- cell therapy that you're
trying in India but as you said there's
a lot you don't know. Is there one
dimension of something you've been
researching that makes you anxious or
frustrated because try as you may that
breakthrough uh isn't coming that wall
isn't crumbling or even cracking.
Well, I mean you know um the um we've
been trying a lot we've actually written
a lot about it and we by we I mean my
whole research team collaborators etc
etc we've been trying to understand we
know a lot about the metabolism of
cancer. So cancer is dependent on
certain nutrients, but we've yet to be
able to exploit th those vulnerabilities
that cancer cells have and make them
into a drug.
So one question that we've always, you
know, banged our heads against have been
for for a while is how can we use our
understanding of the metabolism of
cancer, what cancer eats, um, and try to
make that into a very viable form of
therapy. So imagine diet as a drug uh
against cancer. So we've put a lot of
effort into this. We've made some
inroads into this. In fact, we have a
big trial um that is looking at at this
um in I founded a a company called
Fiatth FE that's going to look at this
in greater detail. Um and I hope we find
something. But we're on on to something.
But it seems like a dim signal that that
uh that's sort of like a flickering fire
in the forest right now. Well, the dim
signal is is the way out of that sort of
long way out. It's the only way out. So,
I always learned so much from talking to
you, from reading your books. Everybody,
if you haven't read it, cell, the song
of the cell is fascinating. Uh, it is
brilliant. Don't be scared. If you're
like me and you're somewhat, you know,
sort of a lay person, this makes science
accessible. And that is the brilliant
thing about Sadhhat's writing. Thank
you. Thank you. My pleasure. Thank you.